# nixbuild.net Action

This GitHub Action sets up [Nix](https://nixos.org/nix/) to use the
[nixbuild.net](https://nixbuild.net) service. It supports all Linux and MacOS
GitHub platforms. From either of those platforms, it can run **x86_64-linux**
and **aarch64-linux** Nix builds.

You need a [nixbuild.net](https://nixbuild.net) account to make use of this
action.

The configuration needed for this action is simple &ndash; you only need to
specify the SSH key used to authenticate your nixbuild.net account. You will
then automatically reap the benefits that nixbuild.net provides:

* Instead of having all Nix builds for a single GitHub job share the same two
  vCPUs, _each_ Nix build will get [up to 16 vCPUs](https://blog.nixbuild.net/posts/2020-06-25-automatic-resource-optimization.html).
  It doesn't matter how many concurrent Nix builds a job triggers, nixbuild.net
  will scale up automatically to avoid any slowdown.

* All Nix builds triggered from your nixbuild.net account can share their build
  results with each other. So, if you have multiple workflows triggering the
  same builds, each derivation will only be built once on nixbuild.net.  This
  works automatically, there is no need for configuring any binary caches, and
  you save time by not having to upload build results.

* Build result sharing also works outside GitHub Actions. You can use
  nixbuild.net from your development machine so that builds already performed
  by your GitHub workflows become available locally, or the other way around.
  Again, no extra configuration or binary caches are needed for this, just a
  [nixbuild.net account](https://docs.nixbuild.net/getting-started/)

* Builds that run on nixbuild.net work just as ordinary Nix builds, so you can
  still do whatever you want with the build results, like uploading to a
  separate binary cache.

See the nixbuild.net [FAQ](https://nixbuild.net/#faq) for more information
about the nixbuild.net service.

If you run into any problems using this action, or have feedback to share,
please open an issue on this repository or drop an email to
[support@nixbuild.net](mailto:support@nixbuild.net).


## Usage

This repository offers two different ways of running Nix builds with
nixbuild.net. You can use this repository as a normal GitHub Action, which lets
you use Nix in any way you like inside your workflow while all builds that Nix
runs are automatically offloaded to nixbuild.net. You need to install Nix in
some way (we'll get to this below), and then explicitly call `nix build` or
similar inside your workflow.

An even more convenient way is by using the [CI
Workflow](.github/workflows/ci-workflow.yml), which is a [reusable
workflow](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows).
This workflow installs Nix, checks out your repository and evaluates a
`flake.nix` file found in it. It then automatically builds the derivations
found in `checks` or `packages` (or both). You can configure exactly which
derivations that should be built; by default all derivations in `checks` are
built. The individual derivations will be built by separate (concurrent) GitHub
Jobs which will give you a very nice overview over successful and failed builds
on GitHub's workflow result page. Care has been taken to run your builds in the
[most
performant](https://blog.nixbuild.net/posts/2022-03-16-lightning-fast-ci-with-nixbuild-net.html)
way possible.

If your project has a `flake.nix` file and you simply want to build your checks
or packages, we highly recommend you to use the CI Workflow. If you don't use
flakes or have more complex needs when it comes to evaluating and building
Nix expressions, use `nixbuild-action`.

### Prerequisites

First, register for a [nixbuild.net account](https://nixbuild.net/#register).
Every account includes free build hours, so you can try this action out for
free.

Then, decide on using an **SSH key** or an **auth token** for authenticating
with nixbuild.net. Currently, it is recommended to use SSH keys, since token
authentication is a new, not fully developed feature of nixbuild.net. The
workflow examples in this README all uses SSH key authentication, but they
should also work with auth tokens.

You should follow the instructions in one of the two sections below, not both.

#### SSH Key Authentication

1. It is highly advisable to create a new SSH key specifically for GitHub's
   access to your nixbuild.net account. That way you can revoke GitHub's access
   at any time and still manage your account with your main SSH key. You can
   add and remove SSH keys to your nixbuild.net account with the
   [nixbuild.net shell](https://docs.nixbuild.net/getting-started/#adding-an-ssh-key).

   ```text
   $ ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -N "" -C "github" -f github-nixbuild-key

   $ cat github-nixbuild-key.pub
   ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIMTOsCkG3Y/zZjSDPKflA5opCHEDBrGySTxK9SqbU979 github

   $ ssh eu.nixbuild.net shell
   nixbuild.net> ssh-keys add ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIMTOsCkG3Y/zZjSDPKflA5opCHEDBrGySTxK9SqbU979 github
   Key added to account
   ```

   If you don't have a specific reason not to, you should disable access to
   the [nixbuild.net shell](http://docs.nixbuild.net/nixbuild-shell/#nixbuild-shell)
   for your new shell, using the
   [allow-shell](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#allow-shell) setting:

   ```
   $ ssh eu.nixbuild.net shell
   nixbuild.net> settings allow-shell --ssh-key set github --set false
   ```

   If there is any chance that less trusted users can submit commits or PRs that
   are able to change your GitHub Actions workflow, it is **strongly recommended**
   that you [lock down your nixbuild.net settings](#nixbuildnet-settings). Users
   might otherwise be able to change settings, possibly incurring unexpected
   nixbuild.net charges.

2. Configure your secret SSH key as a [GitHub Secret](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/encrypted-secrets)

3. Configure `nixbuild-action` to use the SSH key secret like this:

   ```yaml
   uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action@v17
   with:
     nixbuild_ssh_key: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_ssh_key }}
   ```

#### Token Authentication

nixbuild.net has support for authenticating using
[Biscuit](https://www.biscuitsec.org/) tokens. This is what is used for
authenticating in nixbuild.net's [HTTP
API](https://docs.nixbuild.net/api-usage/index.html#authorization), but it can
also be used when interacting with nixbuild.net using Nix.

Currently, the auth tokens serves the same purpose as the SSH keys; to
authenticate nixbuild.net users. In the future, however, it will be possible
to embed authorization policies in the Biscuit tokens, using a [policy
language](https://www.biscuitsec.org/docs/getting-started/policies/). That way,
you can create locked-down tokens that only have access to specific parts or
functions of nixbuild.net.

To use token-based authentication in `nixbuild-action`, follow these steps:

1. Generate a token using the nixbuild.net shell:

   ```
   $ ssh eu.nixbuild.net shell
   nixbuild.net> tokens create --ttl-seconds 525600
   ```

   The `--ttl-seconds` option specifies the token's expiration time.

   The generated token allows full access to your nixbuild.net account, and
   should be treated as a secret.

2. Configure your token as a [GitHub Secret](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/encrypted-secrets)

3. Configure `nixbuild-action` to use the auth token secret like this:

   ```yaml
   uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action@v17
   with:
     nixbuild_token: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_token }}
   ```


### Using the CI workflow

Call the reusable workflow like this:

```yaml
name: Examples
on: push
jobs:
  checks:
    uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action/.github/workflows/ci-workflow.yml@v17
    secrets:
      nixbuild_ssh_key: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_ssh_key }}
```

You can also use [token-based authentication](/#token-authentication) if you
like.

You can configure the location of your `flake.nix` file, filter which
derivations to build, set nixbuild.net [settings](./#nixbuildnet-settings) and
more. Look at the [workflow definition](.github/workflows/ci-workflow.yml#L36)
to see how.

There is an [example workflow](.github/workflows/ci-example.yml) that uses the
CI workflow. You can see how the workflow runs look in the GitHub Actions UI
[here](https://github.com/nixbuild/nixbuild-action/actions/workflows/ci-example.yml).

The reusable CI workflow provides
[outputs](.github/workflows/ci-workflow.yml#L20) that lets you
[process](.github/workflows/ci-example.yml#L50) build results in a subsequent
job.

All build logs are automatically stored as workflow artifacts so you can
download them if needed. You can also see the build logs in the GitHub Actions
console UI.

### Using `nixbuild-action`

1. Install Nix with either
   [nixbuild/nix-quick-install-action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/nix-quick-install)
   or [cachix/install-nix-action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/install-nix).

2. Use `nixbuild/nixbuild-action` in your workflows. You don't need to configure
   anything else than your SSH key.

Now you can use Nix as you would normally do. `nixbuild-action` configures
nixbuild.net as a [remote
builder](https://docs.nixbuild.net/remote-builds/#using-remote-builders), which
means all builds will automatically be sent to nixbuild.net.

Here is a complete minimal workflow example:

```yaml
name: Examples
on: push
jobs:
  minimal:
    runs-on: ubuntu-20.04
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - uses: nixbuild/nix-quick-install-action@v24
      - uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action@v17
        with:
          nixbuild_ssh_key: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_ssh_key }}
      - run: nix-build ...
```

#### Remote Store Building

For optimal build performance, especially on ephemeral instances like the GHA
runners, you should look into how to use [remote store
building](https://docs.nixbuild.net/remote-builds/#using-remote-stores).

In short, remote store building avoids having build inputs being downloaded to
the local machine (the GHA runner in this case). It also lets nixbuild.net make
more decisions on how the builds are scheduled.

There are a few issues around remote store building (both in Nix and in
nixbuild.net), which is why `nixbuild-action` doesn't default to it. However,
the [CI Workflow](/#using-the-ci-workflow) is using it successfully to get the
best build performance. If you want to try it out, you should use the following
options when invoking Nix:

```
nix build \
  --print-build-logs \
  --builders "" \
  --max-jobs 2 \
  --eval-store auto \
  --store ssh-ng://eu.nixbuild.net \
  ...
```

The above options works around issues with
[IFD](https://docs.nixbuild.net/remote-builds/#ifd-builds-import-from-derivation)
and missing build logs. Remote store building with nixbuild.net is only
possible using `nix build`, not `nix-build`, and you need to make sure you
specify the store URI using `ssh-ng://`, not `ssh://`.

When using remote store building, the final build result is not automatically
downloaded to the GHA runner (it will only exist in the remote store in
nixbuild.net). Often, you are mostly interested in seeing if the build succeeds
or not, so this is not an issue. However, if you actually need to use the build
result in your workflow you need to [explicitly fetch
it](https://docs.nixbuild.net/remote-builds/#retrieving-build-output-from-remote-stores).

You might see Nix output `don't know how to build these paths` when starting
a remote store build. You can ignore that output, as it doesn't mean anything is
wrong. There is an open Nix [issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/8052)
about this.


### Generating Build Summaries

`nixbuild-action` can generate a summary of all builds that ran on nixbuild.net,
including information on how much CPU time that was consumed. You can generate
summaries for an individual job, or for the complete workflow. To generate a
summary for the job that uses `nixbuild-action`, configure it like this:

```yaml
- uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action@v17
  with:
    nixbuild_ssh_key: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_ssh_key }}
    generate_summary_for: 'job'
```

To generate a summary for all builds that was executed during a complete
workflow, add a job that runs on the very end of the workflow, and configure
it like this:

```yaml
- uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action@v17
  with:
    nixbuild_ssh_key: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_ssh_key }}
    generate_summary_for: 'workflow'
```

The build summaries look like this:

![summary](examples/summary.png)

### nixbuild.net Settings

Optionally, you can configure [nixbuild.net
settings](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/) that you want your builds to
use. Some settings are available directly as [inputs](action.yml) of this
action. Other settings, like
[max-cpu-hours-per-month](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#max-cpu-hours-per-month),
can only be configured through the [nixbuild.net
shell](http://docs.nixbuild.net/nixbuild-shell/#configure-settings).

The settings configured for this action is communicated to nixbuild.net through
the [SSH environment](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#ssh-environment).
This means that any setting you set here will override your
[account](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#account) and [SSH
key](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#ssh-key) settings.

If you want to disable the possibility to change any nixbuild.net settings
through GitHub Actions, you can set the
[settings-from-ssh-env](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#settings-from-ssh-env)
setting to `false`, either on the account level or the SSH key level. You need
to change this setting from within the [nixbuild.net
shell](http://docs.nixbuild.net/nixbuild-shell/#configure-settings). If you do
that, any nixbuild.net setting configured for the action will be **ignored**.
Only settings configured for your nixbuild.net account or the specific SSH key
used by your GitHub Actions workflow will then be used.

If there is any chance that less trusted users can submit commits or PRs that
are able to change your GitHub Actions workflow, it is **strongly recommended**
that you lock down the nixbuild.net settings as described above.

An example workflow that turns on the
[reuse-build-timeouts](https://docs.nixbuild.net/settings/#reuse-build-timeouts)
setting:

```yaml
name: Examples
on: push
jobs:
  minimal:
    runs-on: ubuntu-20.04
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - uses: nixbuild/nix-quick-install-action@v24
      - uses: nixbuild/nixbuild-action@v17
        with:
          nixbuild_ssh_key: ${{ secrets.nixbuild_ssh_key }}
          reuse-build-timeouts: true
      - run: nix-build
```
